{"question": "Can I charge and after completing attacks take the fight action in the same turn?", "answer": "A charge is considered a move action that allows you to move into melee range. Attacks are separate actions. Generally, you can charge (move), then take a fight action. You cannot charge twice in the same activation, but you can dash (a risky move action) and then charge. The fight action allows melee attacks, and you cannot break up one action into parts; you must complete the move before attacking."}
{"question": "Why does the Iron Sultanate seem safer and more secured than other factions in Trench Crusade?", "answer": "The Iron Sultanate is protected by a massive, invincible iron wall known as the Great Sultanate of the Invincible Iron Wall of the Two Horns That Pierce the Sky. They have strong artillery and death golems backing up this fortification. Although they have fewer warcrimes relative to others, they still have child soldiers, slave soldiers, and experimentation. The wall and their defensive structures make them more secure compared to other areas constantly exposed to amphibious invasion and raids."}
{"question": "Why are most characters in Trench Crusade depicted with their faces covered?", "answer": "In-universe reasons include protection against bullets, mustard gas, shrapnel, and other battlefield hazards. It also serves to dehumanize soldiers, enhancing the grimdark atmosphere. Out-of-universe, it makes the miniatures easier to sculpt, print, and paint, and allows players to project their own interpretations onto characters."}
{"question": "Are artillery witches and automatons sentient?", "answer": "Artillery witches are heavily augmented humans who may possess limited self-awareness and can gain some experience, akin to Terminator-like learning. Automatons are more like clockwork dolls, likely made from bits of damned souls with limited awareness, able to follow orders but lacking emotion or independent thought."}
{"question": "How does the 'Faithful Followers' ability of the Observer work when commanding an enemy model?", "answer": "The Observer's activation ends immediately, and the targeted model's activation begins. The controller of that model (whether friend or foe) controls its actions. When you command an enemy model, they control its activation, but you can force them to activate a model at an inconvenient time or position."}
{"question": "What is the recommended way to handle swarm tactics versus elites in Trench Crusade?", "answer": "Swarm tactics can be effective but are limited by unit caps. Elites have better armor and higher chances to hit, making them more consistent and powerful. Campaign play rewards elites due to experience and skills. A balanced list with a mix of elites and basic troops is generally optimal."}
{"question": "Can you explain how scatter works with weapons like the artillery witch's bomb?", "answer": "If you miss with a scatter weapon, subtract your roll from 7, and the target point scatters that many inches in a direction chosen by the defender. For example, a roll of 5 misses by 2, so the blast scatters 2" in the defender's chosen direction."}
{"question": "Does high ground provide cover bonuses when shooting at targets?", "answer": "High ground by itself does not provide a cover bonus if the target is fully visible. Cover bonuses require at least partial obstruction of the target model's base by terrain. Shooting from higher ground grants +1D bonus to hit, but shooting up at a target on high ground does not confer any penalty."}
{"question": "Can all units shoot at targets in melee in Trench Crusade?", "answer": "Shooting into melee requires randomizing the target between friendlies and enemies 50/50. Some units have abilities that allow shooting without line of sight or into melee, but generally, shooting into melee is risky and randomized."}
{"question": "Why don't the faithful have submarines or sea superiority like the heretics?", "answer": "Heretics have a head start in weapons technology and logistical advantages, including resources mined from Hell and demonic forges. The faithful have not reverse engineered or replicated these technologies fully. The heretics' control of key territories like the Middle East also grants them access to resources like oil."}
{"question": "Can the faithful reclaim territory from Hell?", "answer": "Yes, the faithful can reclaim territory, but it is difficult due to supernatural and mundane obstacles such as portals, corrupted environments, and hostile populations. Reclamation takes time and effort, and the war is largely a brutal stalemate with both sides pushing and retreating."}
{"question": "Why are Paladins sent individually on missions instead of in groups?", "answer": "Each Paladin's armor and training are specialized for a specific circle of Hell, making it hard to send multiple together. Sending one Paladin creates a heroic figure or martyr to inspire humanity, while sending multiple risks losing many at once. Paladins are rare and used sparingly due to their value and vulnerability."}
{"question": "How do the rules handle movement when a model is down?", "answer": "When a model is down, its activation immediately ends. It automatically stands up at the start of its next activation but with half of its usual movement (including dash and charge). While down, melee injury rolls against it are at +1D and any actions it tries to make are at -1D, though it rarely acts while down."}
{"question": "What is the difference between melee and ranged weapons in terms of how many can be equipped?", "answer": "Models have separate 'hands' for melee and ranged weapons. Typically, two hands for melee and two for ranged, plus one for grenades. Equipment like shields or instruments take up hands in both categories. Some models can dual wield pistols (counted as melee weapons). Specific faction rules may modify these limits."}
{"question": "Are there any units or abilities that allow attacking without line of sight?", "answer": "Very few units have abilities that allow attacks without line of sight. For example, blast weapons like grenades or artillery witch bombs target a point and can hit models out of line of sight as long as the blast point is visible and valid. Most attacks require line of sight to the target."}
{"question": "Can an Observer's 'Faithful Followers' ability allow controlling an enemy model's activation?", "answer": "No, the ability ends the Observer's activation and forces the targeted model's activation immediately after. The player controlling that model controls its actions. This allows forcing opponents to activate inconvenient models or gaining an extra activation for your own units."}
{"question": "How does the 'Imported Wares' skill of the Iron Sultanate's Sublime Porte work with mechanized infantry armor?", "answer": "By the rules as written, the Iron Sultanate can import Machine Armour from the New Antioch armory, including mechanized infantry armor, but it must be for elite units. Engineer Body Armour cannot be used by Sultanate units."}
{"question": "What is the official ruling on dashing and charging in the movement phase?", "answer": "Dash is a risky action that allows a model to move up to its full movement distance as an additional move action but cannot be used to charge or retreat. Charge is a move action allowing a model to move directly toward a target within 12" via the shortest route. Movement beyond getting into melee range during a charge is not allowed."}
{"question": "Can you shoot during a charge action?", "answer": "No, charge is a move action to enter melee range. Attacks are separate actions. After charging, you can take a fight action to make melee attacks. You cannot interrupt a charge to shoot; shooting requires a separate action."}
{"question": "How do Yeomen perform in combat and what are good loadouts for them?", "answer": "Basic Yeomen with bolt action rifles have modest hit chances and damage output, often serving as cheap bodies or objective holders. Shotguns with +DICE bonuses at close range are effective when combined with shocktrooper charges. Utility options like medi-kits increase survivability. Balancing cost and effectiveness involves mixing cheap Yeomen with better-equipped elites."}
{"question": "What are the ways to move out of trenches or climb structures?", "answer": "Models can climb out of trenches with their move, dash, or charge actions as trenches are treated as structures with movement costs. Climbing sheer surfaces like walls requires a risky roll. Terrain rules should be agreed upon prior to the game."}